Hello friends, on 1st February 2003, NASA's
Columbia space shuttle was returning to Earth.
Seven astronauts were sitting in it,
one of whom is very special for India,
mission specialist Kalpana Chawla. All these
astronauts are returning to Earth after spending two weeks in space
and their
families and friends are eagerly waiting for them.
This flight is very special for all of them,
but for NASA, it is a very common
routine flight because
this is the 28th flight of Space Mission Columbia program.
8:4 The space shuttle re-enters the Earth's atmosphere.
All systems are
working as expected and everything
seems normal
[Music]
Capsule communicator Cap Com Charlie Hoback is present in the Space Center on Earth.
This is the person who is communicating with the Space Shuttle.
After a few minutes,
Charlie Hoback talks to the astronauts sitting in the space shuttle
about the tire pressure readings. On the
other side, Mission Commander Rick Husband was
giving his answer when suddenly the line gets cut.
Only one word is heard from his side -
Roger.  And their reply remains incomplete.
Charlie Hoback
tries to establish communication again but there is no
response from the other side. 10 minutes pass, the
effort continues but there is still no response from the other side. The
NASA team present at Columbia Houston Czech Space Center is
unaware of the fact that there has been an explosion in the Columbia Space Shuttle.
A few minutes later,
a call comes to the Kennedy Space Center. Turn on the TV and
play the news. Such scenes were being shown in the news. I
hope we can't wait and see what is happening. When
some people present on the ground
looked towards the sky, they could see
as if a comet was falling. A bright
light breaks into two pieces and
then starts scattering into more pieces. The
scattered parts of this bright light are
falling towards the earth. 9:1
Pieces of the spaceship start falling from the sky in Texas State. By
now, NASA had realized that
a very dangerous accident has taken place here. A few
hours later, President George Bush
addresses the country. My fellow Americans, this day
has but terrible news in the world.  Great sadness to our country, the
Kalibia
lost there and there are no survivors. All seven
astronauts were killed and
one of them was 40-year-old Indian-born American
Kalpana Chawla, a woman whose story
became an inspiration for the entire country. Let's
know her full story in today's
video
[sangeet].
Kalpana Chawla was born on 17 March 1962
in a conservative family in Karnal city of Haryana. Her parents Banarasi
Lal Chawla and Sanjayoti Chawla had
come to India from Pakistan during partition.
Kalpana was their fourth and youngest child.
When she started going to school, she was
not given any formal name. She was
called Montu at home. When her elder
sister took her to school and asked for her name, we said that we had
not given her any name. Her name at home was Matu
Mantu. Everyone called her Matu only. So when the need
arose, she chose her own name,
Kalpana, which could mean imagination. At
that time, no one had imagined what this
little girl would do in her life in the future.
Her brother Sanjay  Chawla
says that her struggle with the society
started from childhood itself. I will show these boys that
I am not a girl.
Sanjay says that she was a very determined
girl. Imagine the era of 1960.
Even today, in many places in Haryana, male
children are given preference.
What would have happened in that era? Kalpana Chawla got
interested in space by seeing planes flying in the sky.
In her childhood, she used to
go to the local flying club with her father
and her parents
started noticing her interest. But later
when she grew up, her father, her
professors and teachers all used to say
that do not pursue this profession. There is
nothing in this career path for girls. Sanjay
Chawla says that it was a great hobby for everyone.
Everyone tried to discuss with her
that do not do this, but no one could stop Kalpana.
She completed
her bachelor's degree in Aeronautical Engineering from Punjab Engineering College
and after that
she went to America to do her master's degree
from the University of Texas.
Even her father was disapproving of her saying
that she should not go abroad for studies
because I lived in India in a very small
town and forgot about space. I didn’t even know if
my friends were going, I would let her go
to the engineering college. Later in the year 1988, she did her
PhD
in Aerospace Engineering from the University of Colorado. At
that time, she was about 26 years old and
she started working at NASA’s Ames Research Center.
Her specialization was fluid
dynamics of aircraft, that is, to
study how the air flows like a fluid around the
wings of aircrafts. She
had several pilot’s licenses. She
knew how to fly airplanes, gliders and sea planes. In the year 1991, she
became an American citizen and in 1994,
NAS 100 were selected for astronaut training,
one of whom was Kalpana
Chawla. In November 1997, after 3 years of
training, Kalpana completed her graduation from Harvard Business School.  The first flight takes place
under the Space Columbia program.
Sitting in the STS 87 space shuttle, it
makes more than 250 orbits around the earth and
remains in space for two weeks. The full
form of STS is Space Transportation System. This
was the official name of NASA's Space Shuttle
Program. This program was the fourth such
program in which human space
flights took place. First Project Mercury,
then Project Gemini and then the most famous
Apollo program and then this
program which started in the year 1981. This was the
longest human space flight
program in history which lasted till 2011. Here NASA's
focus was reusability so that the same space shuttle could be brought up and down
again and again so that there is
no need to make new space shuttles every time. There were two
main space shuttles which were used in this program. The
first was Challenger and the second was
Columbia Space Shuttle. After the Columbia disaster,
Discovery, Atlantis and Endeavor space
shuttles were also used, which
you will find in museums today. Out of all these,
Columbia was the first space shuttle which
went into space in April 1981,
27 years before the disaster.  It had successfully completed several missions.
Now you must be thinking, was it
safe to use a shuttle so many times? Is this the reason
behind this disaster? The answer is
no. The STS program was specifically
designed for reusability.
After every flight, there was a very long
process of inspecting,
repairing and refurbishing the shuttles. The
actual reason behind the accident was a
very minor reason, which we will discuss
in the video below, but as a concept, there was
nothing wrong in this STS program. The
24th flight of Columbia Space Shuttle was
Kalpana Chawla's first space flight,
STS 87. In this, she was working as a mission specialist.
She was the main operator of a robotic arm in the flight. Her job in this flight was to
operate a robotic arm which would
deploy the Spartan satellite which would be sent to
study the outer layer of the sun. But
during this mission, something happens which
shakes her confidence a bit. This 1360 kg
satellite goes out of control.  She goes away
and is unable to retrieve it. Three
days later, she has to bring the satellite back through a space walk.
But later, NASA
scientists actually
congratulate her and praise her. She
tells the magazine of the University of Texas that Casey, you did a great job.
Very senior astronauts
told her this. It is revealed that the mistake was not hers
but someone else's in the shuttle crew.
Due to this successful mission, Kalpana
becomes the first woman of Indian origin to
go to space and also the first South Asian American
woman. The Indian Prime Minister of that time,
Inder Kumar Gujral,
also congratulated her. Yes Mr.
Gujral, I hear you loud and clear. How do
you read me Kalpana? We are proud of you, each one of us who has done such a
gallant work.
Thank you sir, thank you very much. And how was Kalpana herself
feeling after going to space for the first time,
she said something like this: When you
look at the sky, at the stars and the galaxy,
you feel as if you are on a small
piece of land.  It should not be a part of the earth
but a part of the entire solar system, the entire universe,
meaning that before any city, any country or
any continent, we humans
belong to the entire earth and the solar system. This
flight lasted for 16 days and many other
scientific experiments were also done in it, such as
it was seen
how the reproduction of plants works in micro gravity,
but even more interesting were the
experiments that were done in its second and last
flight before the crash. On January 16,
2003, at 10:2 am, Columbia Space Shuttle
takes off from this earth for the last time.
This mission was originally planned for 2001
and was delayed 13 times. Finally,
in 2003, it was launched from Kennedy Space Center,
Mission ATA 107. There were a total of
seven astronauts in it, who were led by
Commander Rick Hasbeen, there was a payload commander
Michael Anderson and there were three mission specialists,
one of whom was Kalpana Chawla, the pilot was
William McCool and there was also Lan Ramon from Israel Space Agency,
who was a payload specialist.  The
mission of these astronauts was to
do experiments non-stop for 24 hours. Now non-stop does
not mean without sleeping but by
working in shifts. Obviously, during the 16 days
they were in space, they did about 80
different experiments. Kalpana Chawla of life sciences,
material science and fluid physics
was focusing
on micro gravity, how combustion takes place in space,
how fire can be suppressed, how
crystals grow and even how prostate
cancer grows in space.
Without going into much detail, this was quite
interesting because
when cells grow in laboratories on earth,
they grow in two dimension mono layers
in culture dishes, but in space,
cells grow in three dimensions in the
shape of spheroids.
Cancer tumors are also formed in our bodies in a similar way, so
this helped a lot in understanding tumor behavior.
In this mission, a company called Space Hab
also collaborated with NASA, with the
help of which universities from all over the world
Companies and government agencies
could do their research in space without
going into space themselves, meaning
these astronauts were doing experiments on their behavior. In
fact,
children were taken from six schools of countries like Australia, China, Israel, Japan, USA, who
wanted to get their experiments done. Children wanted to know how
spiders, silk worms, organic
crystals, fishes, bees, ants
react in space from these astronauts
and experiments were also being done on this.
A very interesting thing about flowers came to light
in these experiments that the fragrance of these flowers
changes in space as compared to the fragrance on earth because during the mission all the
data was being transmitted to earth continuously, so the data of
these experiments was saved
and collected and
kept in ground stations.
Videos of some successful experiments were also recorded
which were sent back to the children, such as those related to
ants and crystals,
but  There were more than 40 experiments
whose data could not be recovered. The
reason for this accident, however, was an interesting thing
here, there was a live group of round worms
that survived this disaster
with only some minor heat damages because
they were kept in an aluminum canister case
and in the broken
pieces of the space shuttle that were recovered after the accident,
five-six such cans were found in which
these round worms were alive in petri dishes. In the missions that happened later,
like the second last mission of the STS program of Space Shuttle Endeavor in 2011,
some descendants of these round worms were sent in it. But
now we come to the biggest question of this video,
what was the reason behind this big accident? Did the
pilot make some mistake or did
any other crew member
take some decisions by mistake in a hurry? Was any
astronaut at fault? The truth is
friends that none of these were the reason.
None of these seven astronauts present in Columbia had made any mistake
and all of them were not aware of the accident.  Till three to four minutes
before that, there was no idea what was going to
happen.
Look at this video recording, it is a recording of a few minutes before the accident.
This is 100
g. This is amazing. It is getting very bright at the top. They can't help but feel like they are out of place.
Astronauts are laughing and joking. Kalpana
Chawla is also talking about something. It was only
at 858 that the astronauts sitting here
got an indication that everything was not happening as it should be.
Columbia's
backup flight software
showed some messages on the display to tell that there was a
pressure loss on the four wheels of the left side landing gear of the space shuttle
and this warning had come exactly 1 minute before
the time when Columbia had
lost signal from the ground. The crew sitting on the ground were
trying to communicate about this very thing.
Now how would you feel if I say that
although the astronauts had no idea
about this, but some people in NASA
definitely knew about this problem, not
one or two hours before the accident but several hours before the accident.
He knew about this 16 days before the
shuttle was launched. The thing is that
81 seconds after the launch of Columbia, a
small piece of foam got separated from the shuttle and hit the left wing.
This foam was one of those pieces
which were being used to
connect the external tank of Columbia to the main shuttle. It was
not a big piece, it was only
centimeters, its weight was only 750 grams,
but it hit the left wing so fast,
so fast that its
velocity was estimated to be
between 700 to 900 km per hour.
Two to three days after this incident,
N.D. asked Dieter Moore to take pictures to
find out
what damage had happened to the space shuttle, we can
use our American spy satellites,
but the engineers told that the
chief had refused this request.
This is the reason that when this thing came to light later,
after the accident, in April 2003, he
resigned from his position, accepting his mistake.
In 2008, the book Com Check by space
journalists Michael Cabezas and William Hardwood
revealed that the
Department of Defense was allowing the use of its spy
cameras but the officials
refused. An internal commission was formed to
investigate this matter, whose
name was Columbia Accident Investigation
Board (CAIB in short). In August 2003,
this commission released a very big report
in which it explained in detail
why this Columbia disaster happened and
what was the reason for it. In this report,
NASA's
negligence was mentioned again, the failure of NASA's Human Space Flight
Chief William Ready to not accept the offer that
we can see the damage to the shuttle by using spy satellites.
This is the reason why this damage was not examined
and for the next 15 days, this mission
continued as planned. In February, when the
space shuttle had to return to Earth after the mission was over,
due to the damage that had happened on the left wing of the space shuttle, a small hole had come
and the shuttle was about to return to Earth.  Coming down in the atmosphere,
this damage kept getting bigger. Due to a small
hole, air started leaking.
Usually, there is a thermal protection system that
maintains the temperature inside the space shuttle.
But due to the air, this hole kept getting bigger
and within no time, a
piece of insulation as big as a suitcase had broken.
A very big part of Columbia was now getting exposed to the
fire and gases outside.
Due to this, first the sensors installed in the left wing
stopped working. Temperature
readings were not available. Then the tyre pressure
readings disappeared and within no time,
this spacecraft started falling into pieces.
People present on the ground captured this video in
which bright flashes were
seen. Due to a small piece of foam,
this entire accident happens and seven people
lose their lives. But here it is
also important to mention that the
CIbus that came out in 2003 told that such foam
strikes happen regularly.
In the launches of the space shuttle, 79 missions whose photos were
available during the launch, it was found
that  Such foam strikes have been seen before in 1965,
so it was a very common thing to have
such foam strikes, but the problem with this foam
strike was
that this piece hit the wrong place at the wrong time.
Five years after the accident,
in December 2008, another report came out -
Columbia Crew Survival Investigation
Report. This shows that
due to the cabinet being dipped, the astronauts died
within a few seconds. When the
Columbia space shuttle was disintegrating violently,
they did not have to bear any heat or damage in this
way. In this report, an
attempt was made to reconstruct the last minutes of the crew. What happened in those last
minutes? Warning signs and alerts were ringing all around.
Problem of tire pressure, problem of landing gear.
It was also written in this report that
even if the cabinet equipment was present, the
lives of the astronauts could not have been saved.
The breakup of the crew module and the crew
subsequent exposure to hypersonic entry
conditions was not survivable by any currently
assisting capability.  After this accident,
NASA stopped the Space Shuttle program for two and a half
years and the most important
thing was that the design of the FRAM was also changed.
Now the design was changed in such a way
that such an accident cannot happen again
and thankfully, even after 20 years, no
such accident has happened again. The
Space Shuttle program was continued
till the International Space Station was
ready. In July 2011, when
it was finally terminated, 135
missions were carried out in this program and
it completed 30 years. In these 30 years, a
total of 14 astronauts lost their lives.
Unfortunately,
India lost its pride
but Kalpana Chawla's impact can be
seen on the lives of millions of people,
directly and indirectly. Kalpana was so
passionate about science education that she
wanted every girl in India to
get such education. This is the reason why she
convinced NASA to open a secondary school
in Karnal, Tagore Bal Niketan Senior Secondary School.
Secondary school students can take part
in NASA's Summer Space Experience Program. Since 1998, this
school used to send two girls to America every year.
United Space School for the Foundation for International Space Education in Houston
and Kalpana Chawla used to invite these girls to
her home for dinner.
NASA has given many tributes to Kalpana Chawla and the rest of the crew
members
in the last few years. For example,
the place where NASA landed on Mars was
called Columbia Memorial Station. And there are
many asteroids between Mars and Jupiter
which were named after these crew
members. This is the reason that today
an asteroid named 5182 6
Kalpana Chawla is orbiting somewhere far away in our solar system. If you liked this video, you will
definitely like this video as well. There is a video on another such
accident where the
astronauts actually survived
after being lost in space for weeks. You
can watch this mission of Apollo 13 by clicking here. Thank you very much.